217 Found this helpful Key points Children with disability, autism or other additional needs might be able to get support from the NDIS and other sources. The NDIS doesn’t fund support that children can get from family, friends and other community and government services. This support includes Centrelink payments and community, education, employment, family and health services. Applying for support can be complex. It helps to get organised. Support for children with disability: what’s funded by the NDIS and what’s not If you have a child with disability, an autistic child, or a child with other additional needs , you and your family might be able to get various types of support. The National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) is Australia’s national disability support system. If your child is eligible for the NDIS, it: does fund supports that are reasonable and necessary and that will help your child work towards their goals does not fund supports that your child can get from other community and government services, day-to-day living costs that aren’t related to your child’s disability support needs, or informal supports from family and friends. This guide outlines services and supports that fall outside the scope of the NDIS. Children with disability, autistic children and children with other additional needs can get these services and support, even if they’re not eligible for the NDIS. The NDIS can help children with disability, autistic children and children with other additional needs find services and supports in their communities. Call the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) on 1800 800 100 for more information, or speak to your early childhood partner or local area coordinator if you have one. The Carer Gateway , a disability association or an advocacy organisation could also help. Getting non-NDIS funded support for children with disability You have to apply for support for your child with disability, autistic child or child with other additional needs. For some types of support, you need to supply proof of your child’s diagnosis, if they have one. For other types, you’ll have to explain why you or your child needs extra help. Sometimes you might be put on a waiting list for funding. There are different types of support. They include support that is: paid directly to you, either as income support or as medical or health rebates allocated to your child and paid directly to a service provider paid to a service provider without being specifically allocated to you or your child – for example, disability employment services offered as concession rates on certain goods and services. Applying for support can be a complex process, so it’s important to get organised. It helps to be prepared to spend time talking on the phone, filling in forms and making appointments. It’s also a good idea to keep records of your conversations with service providers and make notes about what you spend on support for your child. Centrelink payments and other supports Carer Allowance (means-tested) Carer Allowance is a means-tested payment for people who care for children with disability or medical conditions at home. The payment starts from the date you put the form in, not the date your child is diagnosed, so it’s a good idea to apply as soon as possible. Carer Allowance is a fortnightly payment. The Government also announces extra one-off payments from time to time. Once your child is over 16, you’ll need to reapply. Carer Payment (means-tested) Carer Payment is a means-tested payment for people who can’t support themselves because they’re providing constant care for children with disability or medical conditions. It’s a fortnightly payment. The Government also announces extra one-off payments from time to time. Once your child is over 16, you’ll need to reapply. Disability Support Pension Children over 16 years old might be eligible for a Disability Support Pension . This might affect your Carer Payment. Health Care Card Your child gets a Health Care Card automatically when you get the Carer Allowance. It means your child pays less for prescription medicines and gets other concessions like bulk billing by some doctors and higher refunds through Medicare Safety Nets. Community services and supports The following people and places can give you support in your local community or help you find local supports and services: child and family health centres GPs or other health professionals local councils local libraries MyTime groups Neighbourhood Houses other parents. Disability assessment services and supports Hearing Services Program The Hearing Services Program provides hearing assessments and a standard range of devices. Children who are eligible will get hearing devices through this program. Other children might be able to get hearing devices through their NDIS plan. Public disability and autism assessment services You won’t have to pay for these assessment services. Contact your state or territory disability or autism association, a health professional (like your child’s GP or paediatrician ), or the NDIS for details of services in your area and information about the process in your state or territory. Some of these services might have long waiting lists. You can get information about these and other services from local and state government disability services , state autism associations , disability-specific organisations and health professionals. Education services and supports Australian Government Department of Education Inclusion Support Program The Inclusion Support Program funds approved child care services, including out of school hours and holiday programs, to include all children in their programs, including children with high support needs. Your child care service will need to apply through its state or territory Inclusion Agency. You can discuss your child’s needs with the child care service. Preschool Inclusion Support Your child’s preschool or kindergarten can apply for Inclusion Support from your state or territory government to fund extra resources to help the preschool or kindergarten include all children in its programs. Ask your preschool or kindergarten director about inclusion support. Government, independent and Catholic schools all have support and funding for children with disability at school . Your child’s school can explain what’s available. You can also contact the disability and education agencies or departments in your state or territory for more information. Employment services and supports Disability Employment Services Disability Employment Services help people with disability find work and keep jobs. They can help your child with things like writing a resumé or practising for job interviews. Job Capacity Assessment Your child might need a Job Capacity Assessment to check whether they’re eligible for the Disability Support Pension. An assessment can also help you understand what help your child might need to find a job. There are many agencies and organisations that specialise in helping people with additional needs prepare for and find work. Get links and contacts for these services in our guide to employment services for young people with additional needs . Family and carer services and supports Carers Australia Carers Australia provides resources for carers and families. Carer Gateway Carer Gateway helps carers find counselling, peer support groups, respite care, home help, equipment and other services. Health services and supports Better Access If your child who has been diagnosed with a mental health condition like depression or anxiety, the Better Access initiative gives your child up to 10 sessions per year with mental health professionals (psychologists, occupational therapists and some social workers) using the Medicare rebate. Your child might also be able to access up to 10 group therapy sessions. Ask about any out-of-pocket costs when you make an appointment. Chronic Disease Management – GP services GP Chronic Disease Management Plans allow your GP to refer your child to allied health professionals – like psychologists, speech pathologists, occupational therapists, dietitians or podiatrists – for up to 5 sessions each year that you can claim at the Medicare rebate. Ask about any out-of-pocket costs when you make an appointment. Medicare Benefits Schedule The Medicare Benefits Schedule lists Medicare services that the Australian Government subsidises through Medicare rebates. This includes some assessment and diagnosis sessions. Medicare Safety Nets Medicare Safety Nets help with high out-of-pocket costs for some Medicare services. Once you’ve spent a certain amount on approved services in a calendar year, you might be able to get more money back on your payments for the rest of the year. There are many Australian, state and territory mental health services for young people. Get links and contacts for these services in our guide to mental health services . Other services and supports Concession schemes Your child might be able to get concessions for utility costs, public transport, vehicle registration and taxi fares. But the types of concessions and the people who can get them vary a lot from state to state. Most concessions apply only to children who have Health Care Cards. You can find more information by searching your state or territory government websites using the keywords ‘concessions’ or ‘subsidies’. Companion Cards Eligible people with permanent disability can get a Companion Card for their companion to attend participating attractions and events for no cost. Did you find this helpful? yes no Tell us what you think First Name * First Name Last Name * Last Name Email Address * Email Address Postcode Postcode Message subject Message subject Select message type General enquiry Comments and suggestions Technical support Other Message * Message Acknowledgements This article has been reviewed for quality and currency by qualified experts . The National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) has also recently reviewed this article. References Ellison, C. (2019). People living with disability: Navigating support and health systems. In E. Willis, L. Reynolds & T. Rudge (Eds), Understanding the Australian health care system (4th edn, pp. 191-207). Elsevier Australia. External links NDIS – Mainstream and community supports NDIS – Support for people who are not eligible Last updated or reviewed 04-09-2023