344 Found this helpful If your child has disability, developmental delay or developmental concerns, support from the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) can help your child work towards their goals in life. The NDIS can also support your family. Our guide answers your questions about the NDIS and children. This page is under review because the NDIS is making changes. After 3 October 2024, there will be a clear list of what you can spend your child’s NDIS funds on. And your child’s NDIS plan will have a total budget amount, which shows you how much money there is and how long it needs to last. For more information about these and other changes, go to NDIS – Changes to NDIS legislation . What is the National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS)? The National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) is Australia’s national scheme for funding reasonable and necessary supports for children with disability, developmental delay or developmental concerns and adults with disability. NDIS support helps people work towards individual goals and gives them choice about the support they need to live the life they want. The NDIS is run by the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA). For more information NDIS terminology: a guide If you or someone you support needs information in Easy English, you can use our NDIS Easy English booklets . The booklets explain the NDIS and cover topics like NDIS plans, NDIS goals and NDIS professionals, plus inclusion and education. You can download them or print them out. What does the NDIS fund? The NDIS funds reasonable and necessary supports to help children with disability or developmental delay work towards their goals in a range of areas. For more information The NDIS: reasonable and necessary supports Your child’s NDIS goals: how to develop goals Setting NDIS goals to meet children’s needs Your child’s NDIS plan: developing and getting a plan Your child’s NDIS support budgets: how they work What doesn’t the NDIS fund? Generally, the NDIS doesn’t fund supports that are: not related to your child’s disability or developmental delay funded by mainstream services like the education or health systems part of day-to-day living costs that aren’t related to your child’s support needs likely to cause harm to your child or pose a risk to others. For more information Support for children with disability: not funded by the NDIS The NDIS and education systems work together to ensure that school-age children’s disability-specific needs can be met at school. For example, the NDIS might fund therapists who can help your child to develop social and communication skills. They might also show teachers how to encourage your child to use these skills at school. How can my child younger than 9 years get support from the NDIS? If your child is younger than 9 years and has disability or is younger than 6 years and has developmental delay or developmental concerns, they might be able to get support through the NDIS early childhood approach . Within the NDIS early childhood approach, there are different criteria for getting support, depending on whether children are younger than 6 years or older than 6 years. Your child must also be an Australian citizen, permanent resident or holder of a Protected Special Category Visa to get this support. For more information The NDIS pathway: how to get NDIS support How can my child aged 9 years and older get support from the NDIS? If your child is aged 9 years and older, they might be able to get support from the NDIS if their disability is permanent or likely to be permanent. Your child must also be an Australian citizen, permanent resident or holder of a Protected Special Category Visa. For more information The NDIS pathway: how to get NDIS support Your child’s NDIS plan: when your child turns 18 What is an NDIS plan? An NDIS plan describes the: supports and services in your child’s life goals your child wants to work towards or you want your child to work towards funding that has been allocated in your child’s plan. For more information Your child’s NDIS plan: developing and getting a plan Your child’s NDIS goals: how to develop goals Setting NDIS goals to meet children’s needs Your child’s NDIS funds: options for managing them What if I disagree with the support in my child’s NDIS plan? If you disagree with the support in your child’s NDIS plan, you can ask for a plan reassessment. For more information Your child’s NDIS application or NDIS plan: when you want a review Will my child’s plan be reassessed? Your child will have regular NDIS plan reassessments, usually every 12 months. About 3 months before your child’s plan reassessment date, your early childhood partner , local area coordinator or an NDIA planner will contact you to talk about how your child’s plan is working. This is called a check-in , and it’s the start of the reassessment process. For more information Your child’s NDIS plan: NDIS plan reassessments Your child’s NDIS plan: what to do if your child’s situation changes How will my child’s NDIS plan be managed? There are 3 options for managing your child’s NDIS plan – self-managed, plan-managed and NDIA-managed. You can choose the option that suits you best. For more information Your child’s NDIS funds: options for managing them Self-managed NDIS funds: tips for parents Can I choose the providers in my child’s NDIS plan? You can choose the NDIS providers in your child’s plan. You can also choose when and how your child gets support. Depending on how your plan is managed, you might be able to choose any providers, or you might be able to choose only registered NDIS providers. For more information NDIS providers: registered and unregistered NDIS providers: quality, respect and safety LGBTQ+ families: choosing NDIS services and providers NDIS services and LGBTQ+ families: service providers in your home Choosing service providers for children with disability, autism or other additional needs Complaints about NDIS providers What can I do if my child’s NDIS application is unsuccessful? Your child’s NDIS application will be unsuccessful if they don’t meet NDIS eligibility requirements. If you want to keep trying to get NDIS support for your child, you have 2 options: Ask for an internal review of the decision about your child’s NDIS application. Do another NDIS application. For more information Your child’s NDIS application: when it’s unsuccessful Your child’s NDIS application or NDIS plan: when you want a review What other support can I get if my child isn’t eligible for the NDIS? If your child isn’t eligible for the NDIS, your child can still get community and other supports. The NDIS can help you with referrals. For more information Support for children with disability: not funded by the NDIS LGBTQ+ families: community, disability and inclusion Child disability: parent support groups How does the NDIS support families and carers? The NDIS can support families and carers in several ways. For example, your child’s plan might include funding that helps you get respite or learn strategies to support your child. It might also include funding for a support coordinator or plan management. For more information Respite care for children with disability, autism and additional needs Your child’s NDIS support budgets: how they work Your child’s NDIS funds: options for managing them How is the NDIS funded? The NDIS is jointly funded by the Australian, state and territory governments and is partially funded by money raised by an increase in the Medicare levy. Did you find this helpful? yes no Tell us what you think First Name * First Name Last Name * Last Name Email Address * Email Address Postcode Postcode Message subject Message subject Select message type General enquiry Comments and suggestions Technical support Other Message * Message Acknowledgements Our content is regularly reviewed for quality and currency. The last review of this article was by the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA). External links National Disability Insurance Scheme NDIS – Applying to the NDIS NDIS – Creating your plan NDIS – Early childhood approach Last updated or reviewed 15-10-2024