24 Found this helpful Key points The NDIS funds reasonable and necessary supports for children with disability or developmental delay. Supports must meet certain guidelines to be considered reasonable and necessary. Reasonable and necessary supports help children work towards their goals in life. This page is under review because the NDIS is making changes. After 3 October 2024, there will be a clear list of what you can spend your child’s NDIS funds on. And your child’s NDIS plan will have a total budget amount, which shows you how much money there is and how long it needs to last. For more information about these and other changes, go to NDIS – Changes to NDIS legislation . Reasonable and necessary supports: what are they? The National Disability Insurance Scheme (NDIS) funds reasonable and necessary supports for children with disability or developmental delay and adults with disability. To be considered reasonable and necessary , a support must be: related to your child’s disability or developmental delay value for money likely to work and benefit your child based on evidence. Reasonable and necessary supports don’t include day-to-day living costs that aren’t related to your child’s disability support needs. Reasonable and necessary supports take into account any informal, community or mainstream supports that your child already has. These might include things like help and support your child and family get from: friends and extended family local and community services health and education systems. What do reasonable and necessary supports do? Reasonable and necessary supports help children and their families work towards children’s individual goals in life. All the supports that are funded by the NDIS and included in your child’s NDIS plan must be related to your child’s NDIS goals . In general, reasonable and necessary supports should help children to: become more independent take part in social and community activities look after their health and wellbeing. How does the NDIA decide what’s reasonable and necessary? The National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA) runs the NDIS. When the NDIA makes decisions about what supports are reasonable and necessary for your child, it uses the National Disability Insurance Scheme Act 2013 , National Disability Insurance Scheme Rules 2013 and the NDIS Operational Guidelines . Did you find this helpful? yes no Tell us what you think First Name * First Name Last Name * Last Name Email Address * Email Address Postcode Postcode Message subject Message subject Select message type General enquiry Comments and suggestions Technical support Other Message * Message Acknowledgements Our content is regularly reviewed for quality and currency. The last review of this article was by the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA). External links NDIS – Reasonable and necessary supports Last updated or reviewed 15-10-2024