18 Found this helpful Key points NDIS providers supply services and supports to people in the National Disability Insurance Scheme. NDIS providers can be registered or unregistered. This affects who can use them. NDIS rules and requirements ensure safety and quality in the services and supports supplied by NDIS providers. About NDIS providers NDIS providers are organisations and people that supply supports and services to NDIS participants like your child. NDIS providers can be companies, charities or not-for-profit organisations. They can also be individuals. Registered NDIS providers and unregistered NDIS providers: what’s the difference? Registered NDIS providers are registered with the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission, a government agency that regulates all NDIS providers. Unregistered providers aren’t registered with the NDIS Commission. The key thing about NDIS providers being registered or unregistered with the NDIS Commission is that it affects who can use them. And this depends on how you manage your child’s NDIS funds : If you self-manage or plan-manage your child’s NDIS funds , you can use registered NDIS providers, unregistered NDIS providers or a mix of both. If the NDIA manages your child’s funds , you can use only registered NDIS providers. Some but not all NDIS providers must register with the NDIS Commission. But being registered or unregistered shouldn’t affect the level of support or quality of service that your child gets from providers. If your child is an NDIS participant, you can search for registered NDIS providers in the Provider Finder on the myplace portal . You can also go to the NDIS website to find registered NDIS providers in your state and territory . Registered and unregistered NDIS providers: NDIS rules and requirements Both registered and unregistered providers must : treat people according to rules in the NDIS Code of Conduct respond appropriately to complaints from people using their services. The NDIS has extra quality and safety requirements for registered providers . They must: comply with NDIS Practice Standards employ, check and train their workers according to NDIS Commission standards ensure workers have the qualifications required for their profession – for example, registration with the Australian Health Practitioner Regulation Agency (AHPRA) ensure workers have a working with children (WWC) check report incidents to the NDIS Commission – for example, serious injury or abuse. The NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission and NDIS providers The NDIS Commission makes sure all NDIS providers work according to NDIS rules and requirements. To do this, the NDIS Commission: makes sure NDIS providers know and follow the rules for quality and safety assists with and responds to concerns, complaints and serious incidents related to all NDIS providers. The NDIS Commission can take action against registered or unregistered NDIS providers or workers who aren’t treating people the way that the NDIS Code of Conduct says they should. For example, the NDIS Commission can ban NDIS providers from working with NDIS participants. The NDIS Commission can also take action against registered NDIS providers who aren’t following the NDIS Practice Standards. Your child is entitled to good-quality, respectful and safe supports and services . If you or your child feel unsafe with your child’s registered or unregistered NDIS providers, or if you’re unhappy with their services, it’s always OK to say so. You can start by raising your concern with your child’s NDIS provider or you can make a complaint to the NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission . Did you find this helpful? yes no Tell us what you think First Name * First Name Last Name * Last Name Email Address * Email Address Postcode Postcode Message subject Message subject Select message type General enquiry Comments and suggestions Technical support Other Message * Message Acknowledgements Our content is regularly reviewed for quality and currency. The last review of this article was by the National Disability Insurance Agency (NDIA). References NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission. (2023). Participant Information Pack . NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission. Retrieved 27 March 2023 from https://www.ndiscommission.gov.au/participants/participant-information-pack. External links NDIS Quality and Safeguards Commission – Compliance actions against providers and individuals Last updated or reviewed 11-05-2023